Add description to the Tumor Mutation Burden subsection in Methods section (#47)
d3b-center/OpenPedCan-methods: content/06.methods.md

### Tumor Mutation Burden [TMB] (`snv-callers` analysis module)

Based on directions from the [TMB Harmonization Project](https://friendsofcancerresearch.org/tmb/), we use the OpenPedCan data to calculate TMB as a biomarker of response for immunotherapy agents. 
Recent clinical studies have associated high TMB with improved patient response rates and survival benefit from immune checkpoint inhibitors [@doi.org/10.1002/gcc.22733]. 

The [Tumor Mutation Burden (TMB)](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis/tree/dev/analyses/tmb-calculation) module performs calculation on `snv-consensus-plus-hotspots.maf.tsv.gz` file which is generated using [Kids First DRC Consensus Calling Workflow](https://github.com/kids-first/kf-somatic-workflow/blob/master/docs/kfdrc-consensus-calling.md) and is included in the OpenPedCan data download. 
TMB is calculated for tumor samples in each experimental strategy (WGS and WXS) using SNV calls for all cohorts and cancer types evaluated in the project.

> The TMB calculation is adapted from [`snv-callers` module](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/tree/master/analyses/snv-callers) of the OpenPBTA-analyses [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340], but uses nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the consensus file called in at least 2 of the 4 caller (Mutect2, Strelka2, Lancet, and Vardict) utilized in the consensus calling workflow and/or 1 of the 4 callers if the SNV was a hotspot mutation. 

Reviewer: moved this up

> The SNV consensus is split into two subsets of SNVs and multinucleotide variants (MNVs). 
> The MNVs subset is split into SNVs, merged to the SNVs subset, and sample-specific redundant calls removed.
> For the resulting merged and non-redundant SNV consensus calls togther with sample-specific BED files, TMB calculation is performed differently for each experimental strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We split the SNV consensus MAF into SNVs and multinucleotide variants (MNVs). 
We split the MNV subset into SNV calls, merged those back with the SNVs subset, and then removed sample-specific redundant calls.
The resulting merged and non-redundant SNV consensus calls were used as input for the TMB calculation.
```

> For all mutation TMBs, consensus calls are used. For WGS samples, the size of the genome covered by the intersection of Strelka2 and Mutect2's surveyed areas which are considered representative of all callers is used for the denominator.

Reviewer: i don't know if I like the quotes here, feel free to remove

`WGS_all_mutations_TMB = (total # mutations in consensus MAF) / intersection_strelka_mutect_genome_size`
For WXS samples, the size of the genome for each the WXS bed region file is used for the denominator with the associated tumor samples.
`WXS_all_mutations_TMB = (total # mutations in consensus MAF)) / wxs_genome_size`

Coding only TMB uses all callers as well and the intersection demoninators are calculated by using coding sequence ranges in the gtf from Gencode 39. 
This file is included in the OpenPedCan data download. 

> SNVs outside of these coding sequences are filtered out before being summed and used for TMB calculations as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SNVs outside of these coding sequences were filtered out before being summed and used for TMB calculations as follows:
```

`WGS_coding_only_TMB = (total # coding mutations in consensus MAF) / intersection_wgs_strelka_mutect_CDS_genome_size`

> For WXS samples, each the WXS bed region file is intersected with the coding sequences for filtering and for determining the denominator to be used with the with the associated tumor samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For WXS samples, we intersect each WXS bed region file with the GENCODE v39 coding sequence, filter variants within this region, and determine this region to be the denominator for the associated tumor samples.
```

> `WXS_coding_only_TMB = (total # coding mutations in consensus MAF) / intersection_wxs_CDS_genome_size`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`WXS_coding_only_TMB = (total # coding mutations in consensus MAF) / intersection_wxs_CDS_genome_size`

Finally, we include an option (`nonsynfilter_focr`) to use specific nonsynonymous mutation variant classifications recommended from the [TMB Harmonization Project](https://friendsofcancerresearch.org/tmb/).
```

Reviewer: technically also another divider here (region size/1000000) to get Mbp https://github.com/d3b-center/OpenPedCan-analysis/blob/90a6756de3ba39acbf3d2718a2ee5106f1afffdf/analyses/tmb-calculation/util/tmb_functions.R#L139-L143

### Tumor Mutation Burden [TMB] (`tmb-calculation` analysis module)

Recent clinical studies have associated high TMB with improved patient response rates and survival benefit from immune checkpoint inhibitors [@doi.org/10.1002/gcc.22733]. 

The [Tumor Mutation Burden (TMB) `tmb-calculation`](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis/tree/dev/analyses/tmb-calculation) module was adapted from the [`snv-callers` module](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/tree/master/analyses/snv-callers) of the OpenPBTA project [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].
Here, we use mutations in the `snv-consensus-plus-hotspots.maf.tsv.gz` file which is generated using [Kids First DRC Consensus Calling Workflow](https://github.com/kids-first/kf-somatic-workflow/blob/master/docs/kfdrc-consensus-calling.md) and is included in the OpenPedCan data download. 
The consensus MAF contains SNVs or MNVs called in at least 2 of the 4 callers (Mutect2, Strelka2, Lancet, and Vardict) plus hotspot mutations if called in 1 of the 4 callers.
We calculated TMB for tumor samples sequenced  with either WGS or WXS.

> We split the SNV consensus MAF into SNVs and multinucleotide variants (MNVs). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Briefly, we split the SNV consensus MAF into SNVs and multinucleotide variants (MNVs). 
```

We split the MNV subset into SNV calls, merged those back with the SNVs subset, and then removed sample-specific redundant calls.

> The resulting merged and non-redundant SNV consensus calls were used as input for the TMB calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting merged and non-redundant SNV consensus calls were used as input for the TMB calculation.
We tallied only nonsynonymous variants with classifications of high/moderate consequence ("Missense_Mutation", "Frame_Shift_Del", "In_Frame_Ins", "Frame_Shift_Ins", "Splice_Site", "Nonsense_Mutation", "In_Frame_Del", "Nonstop_Mutation", and "Translation_Start_Site") for the numerator.
```

**All mutation TMB**

> For WGS samples, we calculated the size of the genome covered as the intersection of Strelka2 and Mutect2's effectively surveyed areas, regions common to all variant callers, and we used this as the denominator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For WGS samples, we calculated the size of the genome covered as the intersection of Strelka2 and Mutect2's effectively surveyed areas, regions common to all variant callers, and used this as the denominator.
```

> Only nonsynonymous variants with classifications of high/moderate consequence ("Missense_Mutation", "Frame_Shift_Del", "In_Frame_Ins", "Frame_Shift_Ins", "Splice_Site", "Nonsense_Mutation", "In_Frame_Del", "Nonstop_Mutation", and "Translation_Start_Site") were tallied for the numerator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
going to move this up so not repeating

`WGS_all_mutations_TMB = (total # mutations in consensus MAF) / intersection_strelka_mutect_genome_size`

> For WXS samples, the size of the genome for each the WXS bed region file is used for the denominator with the associated tumor samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For WXS samples, we used the size of the WXS bed region file as the denominator.
```

`WXS_all_mutations_TMB = (total # mutations in consensus MAF)) / wxs_genome_size`

**Coding only TMB**

> We generated coding only TMB from the consensus MAF as well. The intersection demoninators were calculated using coding sequence ranges in the gtf from GENCODE v39 supplied in the OpenPedCan data download. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We generated coding only TMB from the consensus MAF as well.
We calculated the intersection for Strelka2 and Mutect2 surveyed regions using the coding sequence ranges in the GENCODE v39 gtf supplied in the OpenPedCan data download. 
```

> SNVs outside of these coding sequences were filtered out before being summed and used for TMB calculations as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We removed SNVs outside of these coding sequences prior to implementing the TMB calculation below:
```

`WGS_coding_only_TMB = (total # coding mutations in consensus MAF) / intersection_wgs_strelka_mutect_CDS_genome_size`

> For WXS samples, we intersect each WXS bed region file with the GENCODE v39 coding sequence, filter variants within this region, and determine this region to be the denominator for the associated tumor samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For WXS samples, we intersected each WXS bed region file with the GENCODE v39 coding sequence, sum only variants within this region for the numerator, and calculate the size of this region as the denominator.
```

We calculated TMB for tumor samples sequenced  with either WGS or WXS.
Briefly, we split the SNV consensus MAF into SNVs and multinucleotide variants (MNVs). 
We split the MNV subset into SNV calls, merged those back with the SNVs subset, and then removed sample-specific redundant calls.
The resulting merged and non-redundant SNV consensus calls were used as input for the TMB calculation.
We tallied only nonsynonymous variants with classifications of high/moderate consequence ("Missense_Mutation", "Frame_Shift_Del", "In_Frame_Ins", "Frame_Shift_Ins", "Splice_Site", "Nonsense_Mutation", "In_Frame_Del", "Nonstop_Mutation", and "Translation_Start_Site") for the numerator.

**All mutation TMB**
For WGS samples, we calculated the size of the genome covered as the intersection of Strelka2 and Mutect2's effectively surveyed areas, regions common to all variant callers, and used this as the denominator.
`WGS_all_mutations_TMB = (total # mutations in consensus MAF) / intersection_strelka_mutect_vardict_genome_size`
For WXS samples, we used the size of the WXS bed region file as the denominator.

> `WXS_all_mutations_TMB = (total # mutations in consensus MAF)) / wxs_genome_size`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`WXS_all_mutations_TMB = (total # mutations in consensus MAF)) / intersection_wxs_genome_size`
```
?

Reviewer: disregard
